there are many people who sleep you know
eight to nine hours and they wake up
feeling like
straight up you know hot garbage you
know what I'm saying and they're just
wondering why it's because
this particular topic
is and me being a nutritionist like I
was all like Food Matters food first
food is the most important thing but in
my practice and seeing people coming in
that you know we've got these folks over
here you know 80 percent of the time are
able to reverse type 2 diabetes heart
disease get off their lisinoprils and
all this different stuff and then we've
got this category of people who just
like literally sometimes would
ironically kind of keep me up at night
like what is wrong like I'm doing all
these things right are they lying to me
and then it wasn't until I started to
ask people about their sleep that it
just like it changed everything and this
was about six years ago and so
then and here's the key
I can't just tell people they need to
sleep more you know this like people
don't want to change that much like we
want change but we want to be a little
bit right and so I found clinically
proven strategies that are super easy to
implement almost things that can happen
on automatic to help them improve their
Sleep Quality right and once we did that
it's like the floodgates would open for
people you know I've been struggling for
sometimes you know 15 20 years with
their weight finally the weight comes
off you know and seeing people
struggling with heart disease or high
cholesterol you know the so-called bad
cholesterol
um and seeing those numbers finally get
regulated once we got their sleep
optimized and I knew that this was
incredibly important part of the
conversation that was left out and as
we'll talk about I know now that our
Sleep Quality is more important than our
diet and exercise combined and what it
does for our health and also literally
our physical appearance
fascinating stuff how much more fat you
lose when you get optimal sleep it's
it's insane that's a bold statement so
walk me through what are some of the um
that just core benefits that I'm going
to get assuming that I'm sleeping
sub-optimally like why is that a problem
since that's probably one of the most
celebrated like things like when you get
a little sleep people like Champion you
normally I'd sleep five to six hours a
night with no alarm okay I haven't set
an alarm in 15 years so that's just that
was my cycle
um I go to bed early very consistently
my diet is on point my exercise is on
point and so I'd wake up feeling awesome
and so I thought this is cash money but
because I don't set an alarm that my
sleep cycle will change and right now
I'm getting like seven to nine hours out
of nowhere and super consistently and I
literally have no idea why I'm warmer
now so I used to be freezing cold at all
times and then at the same time that my
and I don't know correlated causative no
idea
um I've started being warmer while I
sleep and then during the day so what
are like the core components of sleep
was something bad happening to me or
less than optimal when I was only
getting six hours even though I felt
good
um any correlation between the Heat and
the extra sleep there's there's for
there's a lot to impact there number one
uh what's so interesting is that you you
were doing something exceptionally right
as far as what the research shows with
improving your sleep which is you're
going to bed kind of consistently a
little bit earlier than other folks
might and so what we're called what we
call this is this anabolic window or
what we call Money time sleep and this
is generally between the hours of Tim
and two because it's more lined up with
their natural melatonin secretion so if
you go to sleep during those times you
actually spend more time in the deepest
most anabolic stages of sleep and you
tend to produce more human growth
hormone than other folks so you were
already winning with that this is why
you have a tendency to feel better even
if you're getting less sleep because
I this isn't called sleep more right
it's sleep smarter and there are many
people who sleep you know eight to nine
hours and they wake up feeling like
straight up you know hot garbage you
know what I'm saying and they're just
wondering why it's because it's the
quality of sleep and when I say quality
of sleep what does that mean let's break
that down so your sleep is regulated by
changes in your in your brain waves it's
really fascinating stuff and we still
don't know really what sleep is trying
to Define sleep is like trying to Define
um you know when Forrest Gump is like
life is like a box of chocolates sleep
is like pretending to be dead we don't
really know right but we do know the
changes that happen in the brain we
cycle from kind of a normal waking state
with with gamma beta we're probably in
beta right now we moved to Alpha Theta
Deltas where the Deep anabolic dreamless
sleep takes place and we need all of
them and there's a certain percentage we
spend in each that helps to rejuvenate
our mind and bodies and if you optimize
certain things you'll do it more
efficiently one of those gear shifts
like if you think about your body like
this kind of manual transmission is
melatonin like people hear about
melatonin's or sleep hormone it just
helps your body to efficiently go
through your sleep cycles and if your
melatonin is suppressed by various
things you know I'll share a couple then
you're not going through those
efficiently and you can wake up feeling
like a pinata after the party The Next
Step even though you're spending all
this time on the mattress so that's
number one
number two there's this interesting
process called thermal regulation
there's a natural drop in your core body
temperature at night to help facilitate
sleep for all of us if things are
running properly but what was
fascinating and I shared a study about
this is that they tested insomniacs and
everyone in this particular clinical
study all had too high body temperature
at night it would not go down
and so what they did was they fit them
with these thermosuits right that lowers
their skin temperature not even their
core temperature just one degree and
virtually eliminated all their symptoms
of insomnia whoa Ambien can't do that
all right and it's as simple as paying
attention to how your body temperature
influences your sleep and so with your
body temperature changing like that it's
kind of feeling more of an insulation
as a result of having more sleep there's
a ton of different things that could be
correlated there so I'm not going to say
that the sleep is a causative Factor but
it's really interesting how your body
does change in accordance to sleep
there's a natural rise in your core body
temperature as the day goes uh as I'm
sorry as the night goes on that helps to
kind of wake you up
um so what I did want to share though
when I said that kind of bold statement
in the beginning
when we're talking about how sleep
influences your body composition I think
everybody needs to know this
there was a this study really blew my
mind and this was done to the University
of Chicago and they took people
and they put them on a calorie
restricted diet kind of typical stuff
again I'm taught in college to see the
impact on weight loss when they're sleep
deprived or getting enough sleep all
right so they put the people on this
particular diet monitor everything one
phase of study they're getting eight and
a half hours of sleep all right and then
they track all their metrics another
phase of the study same exact diet same
exercise they don't change anything else
but now they sleep deprive them and they
take away three hours of sleep so now
they're getting five and a half hours of
sleep versus eight and a half hours of
sleep at the end of the study they found
that when individuals were well rested
they burned 55 more body fat just by
getting more sleep and so the question
is how does this happen melatonin when I
talked about this a little bit earlier
it's not just that it's involved in
sleep it's also involved in fat loss in
this study that was done in the journal
Pioneer research found that melatonin
production helps to increase your body's
mobilization of something called Brown
adipose tissue right this is a type of
fat that burns fat all right the reason
that it's brown is that it has more
mitochondria so it's very energy dense
right these mitochondria just for people
who I'm sure people have heard of this
but it's like these Energy power plants
in your cells that are creating the
energy currency of your body like how
you experience energy the energy
exchange something called ATP
and so when you are producing adequate
melatonin you're producing and
mobilizing adequate amounts of brown
adipose tissue which just puts you in a
metabolically advantaged state all right
but if you're not getting the Melatonin
production which you've got to meet two
requirements number one you need a
biological night
so that means this could actually be
during the day but it's a consistent
cycle of when it gets produced but the
other requirement needs to be met that
you need Darkness your body produces
melatonin exclusively in darkness and so
that's one also how to get how do they
get that body fat change HGH production
which we talked about too human growth
hormone is muscle sparing
it's a big driver of energy it's also
known as a youth hormone kids have an
insane amount of HGH being produced this
is why they have so much energy we have
a pretty sharp decline in our production
right around 18 to 20. but my argument
is that around 18 to 20 we generally in
our culture like we leave the house we
might go to college that kind of thing
and we no longer have structure we no
longer have rules and we're not going to
produce as much HGH
third thing really quickly
um is and this is all has to do with the
diet and the food choices is leptin all
right and I know people's talked about
leptin before but leptin is your body's
kind of glorify satiety hormone and so
when you're producing adequate amounts
of leptin you feel more in control right
you feel more satiated but when when
leptin kind of falls off the map or you
have leptin uh resistance can take place
then we're going to have some pretty big
issues with you regulating your Cravings
your appetite and so Stanford University
researchers found that just one night of
sleep deprivation radically suppresses
your leptin and now I hope folks can
start to pay attention whenever you
might not get the best sleep how your
Cravings change the next day you're
gonna have a tendency to want to number
one eat more number two you want to eat
more kind of the starchy crunchy salty
sugary type things and I remember my
wife who's actually here uh when we had
our son and I she she's never seen me
eat this food I was sitting there like
waiting for the baby to come I was
eating chocolate covered raisins I'm
just like and I didn't even realize I
was doing it you know it was like three
o'clock in the morning you know and so
that's another thing and uh last one
I'll share and there's so many that
create that change in your body
composition
but this one is incredibly important
is cortisol cortisol has been drugged
through the mud recently you know it's
getting blank for everything but it's
not really a bad guy it's just
misunderstood right cortisol is
incredibly important for example
cortisol is important for your thyroid
to work right and that's kind of like
the metabolism regulator of your body
but here's the thing
just one night of sleep deprivation
radically increases your cortisol and
suppresses melatonin actually as well
but this rise in cortisol has a really
powerful ability to start to break down
your muscle tissue which your muscles
your body's kind of fat burning
machinery and so it can convert your
muscle tissue into glucose it's a
process called gluconeogenesis
as a kind of fight or flight response
because your physiology doesn't know why
you're not sleeping you know it must be
some danger about you know and so
understanding those major hormones and
there's many others you start to see the
picture that gets painted with just how
much your seed quality impacts your
physical appearance
really crazy I've always known you need
sleep but I didn't know why and so
getting into or transitioning I should
say because I always knew you needed
sleep because if I didn't get it I felt
terrible but that was sort of the the
end of it and I even let myself just
stop at that we don't really know why
you sleep but not diving into to the
real breakdown which is really
fascinating so what are things then that
people can do to actually optimize their
sleep yeah this is what it's really all
about
you know I like to start with the low
hanging fruit first
um and something really really
fascinating is just simply
changing or embracing the time of day
that you exercise can improve your sleep
quality and so Appalachian State
University did a really cool study and
they wanted to see what time of day
exercising various times a day how does
it impact Your Sleep Quality and so they
had the study participants to exercise
exclusively at 7 A.M and another phase
exclusively at 1 pm in the afternoon
another phase exclusively at 7 pm in the
evening they compiled all the data and
at the end of the study they found that
morning exercisers spend more time in
the deepest most anabolic stages of
sleep so they're producing more human
growth hormone they have more efficient
sleep cycles what we've been talking
about
they also tend to sleep longer and this
is the one that kind of can get glass
past
on average they had about a 25 greater
drop in blood pressure at night
so what's what's up with that that's
correlated with a deactivation of your
sympathetic fight-or-flight nervous
system right so you're actually able to
shift gears get to that parasympathetic
rest and digest calming down by getting
some exercise in in the morning
and so how do we employ this though
that's the question because some people
just like you know I can't exercise in
the morning and there's also people who
exercise in the morning who might have
terrible sleep
and it's because this is not like the
Magic Bullet this is a thing to stacking
your condition if you're doing this and
then messing up the one I'm going to
talk about next you're probably not
gonna have the best sleep so
here's how to employ this just five
minutes
and I tested this each morning I do this
five minutes of exercise you know it
might be just jumping on a rebounder you
know a little mini trampoline for five
minutes go for a quick power walk do
some Tabata which is just four minutes
and a little Mobility work and I guess
most people don't know what Tabata is
high intensity interval training
basically it's 20 seconds of exercise
followed by 10 seconds of rest repeated
over and over again for four minutes
and in his clinical studies this was
found to outperform
you know traditional cardio like the
kind of moderate intensity 45 minutes of
exercise in four minutes wow the change
in your cardiovascular benefits body
composition and also changing your
mitochondria as well this is why it
works it does something called a
cortisol reset all right and we talked
about cortisol but again it's a good
thing if it's in the right time and the
right amounts
clinically I would call these people
tired and wired that would come in and
looking at the hormone panels and the
cortisol would be really low in the
morning and high at night thus they have
sleep problems
so you naturally if you're if your
cortisol is on a natural hormone Rhythm
it would be elevated at its peak in the
morning right around 6 a.m to 8 A.M and
then gradually decline as the day goes
does that have to do with what time you
wake up
sort of I mean the cortisol will kind of
tend to nudge you out of sleep but also
we'll tend to notice that as the day is
it your sleep goes on it becomes lighter
and lighter anyways right this is when
you tend to remember your dreams like at
the at the end of the sleep
and so
getting this little boost like helping
your body to propel and get your
cortisol up via exercise helps to reset
that Rhythm and get you back on track so
that's why it works so that's number one
low hanging fruit just get in five
minutes of exercise start in the morning
no matter what just five minutes that's
all you need is going to help to create
this Snowball Effect of good things for
you you know five minutes if this is the
time you do go to the gym and do your
full workout so be it all good but
everybody who's not already doing that
just get that five minutes in the second
one and this one is more of the tough
love and the most difficult but this is
the most important one in our culture
today and this has to do with our Tech
all right so Harvard researchers have
confirmed that blue light exposure from
our favorite devices you know our iPads
or iPhones
Androids tablets televisions they do in
fact suppress your melatonin
substantially because it your body
essentially thinks the sun's out is that
the problem so we have photoreceptors
that are always trying to gauge time it
is right because our bodies are wired up
to be in sync with nature but only
recently like literally just the past
few decades have we been able to
manipulate and basically create a second
daytime right so your body's just it
doesn't really know how to figure it out
and so the blue and white Spectrum
specifically are the ones that are more
similar to Daylight and so what it's
doing is and so here's what the
researchers found basically
every hour you're on your device at
night suppresses melatonin for about 30
minutes all right so if you're on your
you know you watch a movie three hour
movie for example
your melatonin is going to be suppressed
even if you go to bed right after you're
not producing adequate melatonin for
about an hour and a half and so again
you can be unconscious from sheer
physical exhaustion but you're not going
to go through your sleep cycles
efficiently and so just be mindful of
that what I encourage people to do is to
give yourself a screen curfew just 30
minutes all right I don't want to make
this complicated just 30 minutes but
here's the rub
we are addicted to our devices like
straight up we just need to be on I am
we all are you know basically it's
because of this dopamine Loop right
dopamine is so powerful so interesting
dopamine is one of the things I truly
feel has helped to create our
civilization as it is because it drives
us to seek right dopamine drives us to
to seek and and to grow and to find to
discover the internet is perfect for
manipulating this because every time you
look for something you find something
especially social media you seek fine
seek fine you produce the dopamine that
drives you to look but why do you keep
going is every time you find something
you get a little bit of a hit from your
opioid system like it's like this slow
drip I have morphine and so it starts to
like feel really good and to the point
where you might be doing your work and
like you've got a deadline and you'll
just you know like I check Instagram
real quick before you know it's like 30
minutes later and you fall into the
internet black hole it's like it just
pulls you in so be aware of that I'm not
saying again our connection with tech is
just going to grow so I'm not bashing
that it's just be aware of it and that
when you try to abide by this principle
which will really really help Your Sleep
Quality to give yourself a screen curfew
you can't just sit there and twiddle
your thumbs because you'll get what I
call the internet Jitters all right
you'll start getting like a little bit
of a withdrawal effect like
let me just check one just one one post
what we have to do is this you have to
replace it with something of greater or
equal value it's really that simple
hopefully it's what I encourage people
to do this is an opportunity to connect
right connect with your significant
other your kids the people like physical
like have a real conversation with
somebody right I know it sounds crazy
but it really works it's really really
good
and also this is a great opportunity if
you you know if you're in a relationship
or not whatever you're into you could
you know uh utilize and I have a chapter
on this as well intimate time because
there's a big connection between sex and
sleep and there's also a big connection
between sleep and sex and how it impacts
your sex life and so when we have an
orgasm for example we produce a chemical
I'm sorry cocktail of chemicals
including oxytocin uh norepinephrine
prolactin and oxytocin for example has
been found clinically to basically
combat the effects of cortisol and
hopefully sex is more interesting than
Instagram but you know I don't know it
depends on how you're doing it and so
that's what I want people to do a screen
curfew and or use these hacks utilize
some blue light blocker blockers and so
for your desktops laptops things like
that you get an app called flux that
pulls out the most Troublesome sleep
sucking spectrum of light from your
screen it basically cools your screen
off and it's a simple app you set it and
forget it it's totally free just go to
Dr Google type in f.lux and a couple
clicks and it's on your device I've been
using it for maybe five or six years I
love it and uh for your uh telephone you
know your cell phone we've got on the
iPhones built in now is night shift uh
with Androids the best one out there uh
from my research is one called Twilight
you know so there's options for
everybody then what about the ambient
light at night or if you're watching a
movie again I don't want to get don't
get too neurotic about it but if this is
a problem for you and you're not
sleeping as well as you could be or your
results your body composition are
changing you're not getting that blood
pressure down you're not having that
Focus you need through the day then you
might want to address this but
another little hack is to get some blue
light blocking glasses the first ones I
had was straight up like I just built
the birdhouse but now there's some
really cool stylish ones that you can
rock as a matter of fact you'll create a
neural Association when you put the
glasses on and you'll start to get
sleepy you know it's nuts and that is
another thing right there is to create
an evening ritual right your brain is
always looking for patterns a lot of
successful people especially listening
to the things that you're putting out
there have a success ritual in the
morning but a great morning starts the
night before you know a truly great
morning
and so
a couple of quick things people can do
is the thermoregulation piece turn down
your thermostat all right now this one's
again this is going to hit a pressure
point for some people but according to
research between 62 and 68 degrees
Fahrenheit is ideal for sleep and so for
some people it's going to sound a little
bit Frosty but lowering the thermostat a
little bit can increase have incredible
benefit uh for your sleep but this
doesn't mean you can't use your covers
and put on some warm socks that kind of
thing so cooling off this thermostat
making sure that your bedroom ideally I
call it a sleep sanctuary and so that
when you walk into your bedroom at night
if your brain has a neural Association
when I go into my bedroom I'm watching
television or I'm working those channels
are going to fire because of the myelin
getting laid down over the years of you
doing that behavior or even months it
can get laid down what is up my friend
Tom bilyu here and I have a big question
to ask you how would you rate your level
of personal discipline on a scale of one
to ten if your answer is anything less
than a 10. I've got something cool for
you and let me tell you right now
discipline by its very nature means
compelling yourself to do difficult
things that are stressful boring which
is what kills most people or possibly
scary or even painful now here is the
thing achieving huge goals and
stretching to reach your potential
requires you to do those challenging
stressful things and to stick with them
even when it gets boring and it will get
boring building your levels of personal
discipline is not easy but let me tell
you it pays off in fact I will tell you
you're never going to achieve anything
meaningful unless you develop discipline
all right I've just released a class
from Impact Theory university called how
to build Ironclad discipline that
teaches you the process of building
yourself up in this area so that you can
push yourself to do the hard things that
greatness is going to require of you
right click the link on the screen
register for this class right now and
let's get to work I will see you inside
this Workshop from Impact Theory
University until that my friends be
legendary peace out
and so you might have the intention of
going to bed but if your TV's in there
your brain is going to be firing
expecting to watch television and parts
of your brain will be waking up in a way
and so
I encourage people to get the tech out
of your room have your sleep have your
bedroom be a sleep Sanctuary you know or
some place that's just for the the
double s which is sleep and sex here's
also a really interesting reason why
there's an Italian study done they found
that couples who have a television in
their bedroom have 50 less sex really
yeah yeah that's interesting and you
know this is a little bit more
middle-aged little past middle age the
people in the study but and I know some
people like that's not true I have sex
all the time you probably do it in a
snowstorm like it doesn't matter where
you are like you're a human rabbit it
doesn't matter but for other people it's
like a distraction right it's a
distraction and it can also you know
um create all of those kind of chemical
soup issues that we've been talking
about with elevating cortisol and those
kind of things so I ideally get your
television out of the room uh the other
Tech and last thing with the Sleep
environment I'll share when I talked
about melatonin needles two conditions
biological night
and you also need a dark environment and
so if you're in an environment where
you're maybe in a Suburban or city
environment where there's like neighbors
porch lights coming in there's LEDs
outside cars coming up and down the
street
as crazy as this sounds that that small
amount of light where we're now dubbing
light pollution
can have a significant impact on your
sleep quality and here's here's why we
know this Cornell University I think did
the best study on this and they took a
test subject and had them sleep in an
otherwise dark room and they took a
light a fiber optic cable and a light
the size of a quarter and put it behind
their knee and that was enough to
disrupt their sleep cycle because your
skin also has photoreceptors that is
sending information to your brain your
nervous system your internal organs to
try to tell your body what time it is is
trying to figure it out
you know so we want to get rid of that
artificial light exposure
now does this mean Moonlight and stars
no humans have evolved with those things
in their Lux like I actually put a lux
chart in the book it's so small compared
to even the weakest fluorescent bulbs
and so get yourself some blackout
curtains if that external light is an
issue internal light you know your alarm
clocks and you know light you know lamps
you know some people still are sleeping
with their lights on and things like
that be mindful of that and also what
you can do is just change the bulb color
you know if you still have issues with
the dark which some adults do and that's
okay
um
you can change the bulb cover color and
I actually had some NASA scientists or
people that work with them to send me
some different bulbs because folks in
space they don't have that biological
clock and so they would experience all
these different health challenges and
they had to try to figure it out they
knew that it was an issue with their
sleep and so they start to give them
different bulbs for different times of
day in a way you know even though
they're in outer space
so it's really cool what you can do with
these little hacks but bottom line is
you want to have a dark cycle so you can
produce melatonin and you know those are
just a few those are just a few of the
different things people can do
it's really interesting because you've
talked about how
um like the light behind the knee it's
you've got these photoreceptors and
they're communicating there's a lot of
signaling going on
you've said that the brain makes the
body and then you've also said that food
is data talk to me about what do you
mean by food is data I think that's a
pretty powerful concept yeah definitely
this was a big game changer for me early
on when I realized that you know food
the food that I was eating wasn't just
food it was information and every single
bite of food that I was eating and this
is something I've been studying now for
over 10 years I
absolutely love this is something called
nutrigenomics and it's a study looking
at how every single molecule of food
that you eat impacts your genetic
expression
food is that powerful you know in
several other epigenetic factors like
sleep which might be the biggest
epigenetic influence
you get to choose what kind of copies
are being made of you you know your
genes are basically blueprint to print
out certain copies and there's upwards
of like 4 000 different variations that
one gene can do and you get to have a
big role a big part in how those genes
are getting expressed so understanding
that when we eat you know a particular
food it isn't just I'm just eating this
thing it's setting off a Cascade of
events
and it's incredibly empowering but also
it can be really sobering and again I
don't want to get people into the
neurotic State because I've been there
but it's more like
the majority of what we want to do is
things that are hormone healthy things
that are healthy for your DNA things
that are healthy for your genetic
expression because you know you again
you have a big influence on that and so
you know early on really kind of having
that that light bulb go off it really
empowered me to start
making food decisions that can help me
because you know if you really think
about this
I had the spine of an eight-year-old man
when I was 20 years old
I'm in some ways I'm like Benjamin
Button all right like I'm aging
backwards you know have you guys talked
about telomeres yet on the show now so
telomeres are basically
the most
the most valuable asset that we have
currently
to basically tell us how long we're
going to live all right and so what do I
mean by that your telomeres are like
these little the eaglets at the end of
your shoestrings that keep your your
shoestrings from unraveling that's kind
of like how telomeres work they're the
end caps uh at the end of your
chromosomes and as life goes on your
cells divide and those uh they keep
getting clicked clipped off those
telomeres get clipped off shorter and
shorter to the point where your DNA
basically unravels right and so
the crazy thing is that
sleep your your sleep
Spectrum you know whether you're getting
high quality sleep or sleep deprived
could be the biggest influence on your
telomere length all right so literally
aging you faster when you're sleep
deprived so because you know when we're
younger we're like
sleep three hours whatever it's no big
deal and you can quote get away with it
and you can but what you're doing is
accelerating your aging process I know
that when this was happening even before
I got the diagnosis
his sleep just wasn't like I wasn't
something I thought about you know and
so I was accelerating my aging process
little did I know another huge player in
that is the information that we put into
our body you know the food and the water
and also a big player is our environment
you know our relationships the people
around us
and if you were to ask me you know sleep
is the is more powerful than exercise
and nutrition combined on your physical
appearance and your health
but your relationships are the biggest
governing for us over all of it
because that is the most influential
thing on the decision you make with your
sleep on the decision you make with the
food that you eat on the decisions you
make on whether or not you're exercising
or when and how you do it you know so
it's incredibly important to be mindful
of for looking at ways that we can Stave
off the aging process stay young vital
healthy happy
as long as possible we need to be
mindful of all of those things and again
I I don't want to create a neuroses
today but there is a way to go about it
and I think that the foundational piece
is listening to people like you you know
constantly you know every day getting
that daily dose of like getting your
mind right getting your inner game
together and immersing yourself in
information like this and carry that
with you into the world and do your best
to get around people that are uplifting
you that are supporting you and you
being the person that you want to become
this cookie cutter system of nutrition
has not is not really given us good
results if we just look at what's
happening with our society a big part of
that as you mentioned when I went to
school I went to a nice private
university very expensive they had a
great pre-med track and I took a
nutritional science class which was an
elective I didn't have to take it and I
thought nutrition had to do with Fitness
right so I was like okay I'm gonna learn
about about how to be more fit there was
Nuance there because you know I didn't
really understand the difference with
health and fitness and so the very first
day of class the very first day of class
he said that if you want to control your
body composition all you have to do is
control calories if you want to control
your health we just need to manage
calories were the tip of the spear it
was the thing that we were taught if we
can regulate this thing this entity then
we can regulate our health
now the big problem is kind of
manifested in culture is that there's
actually these epic caloric controllers
right sort of like epigenetics right
there's things that are above genetic
control now we know there are things
above caloric control that actually
control what calories do in our bodies
which gets back to our unique metabolic
fingerprint in a moment but getting that
from my professor by the way sidebar
my professor was borderline obese
himself and he was an incredibly
brilliant man and he was doing the
things that he wasn't like secretly
going in like beer bonging like
Three Musketeers or whatever like he was
teaching us at the time it was the food
pyramid right seven to eleven servings
of whole grains each day should be the
staple the the base of the diet and in
that system of thinking all he did was
he created learned helplessness because
he kept trying to do the thing he was
just like well I just need 14 to 19
servings of whole grains and I'll get it
I just need to cut my calories more and
it wasn't working and what we know today
is that for example I'll give you one of
the the Epic Galore controllers you've
said this before Tom you've heard many
people say this it's not just the
calories it's the quality of the
calories just like with sleep smarter
it's not just the minutes of sleep it's
the quality of those minutes
and so now we've got a really
interesting study this was published in
food and nutrition research and I mapped
this out really well in each martyr
the research want to find out what
happened what happens when you eat a
meal of Whole Foods versus a meal of
processed foods and so they had some
tests subject to consume what they
deemed to be a whole food sandwich which
was multi-grain bread and cheddar cheese
all right now that's of course it's
debatable but now they've got the other
group of test subjects consuming a
processed food sandwich which was white
bread and cheese product and some folks
might be like what the hell is cheese
product that's what craft is craft
singles they can't legally call it Kraft
cheese because there's not enough cheese
in the cheese but as I digress so
anyways here's the most important part
of this story
the sandwiches are the exact same amount
of calories the whole food version and
the processed food version
same amount of fats carbohydrates and
proteins on paper same sandwich it
should have the same Metabolic Effect
according to the calories and calories
out model but here's what happened
after compiling the data the folks who
ate the processed food sandwich had a 50
reduction in calorie burn after eating
that meal versus the people who ate the
whole food version all right so I'm
going to pause it there why how did they
determine burn right yeah so this is a
great example a little sidebar for
everybody to understand the pathway of
fat leaving your body or what we call
this caloric expenditure
so that's one of the things we're
demystifying and he's smart is like
where the hell does fat go where does
fat go when you lose it where does this
quote burn process happen so number one
we've got
when we're thinking about like
eliminating fat we're not we can't
indiscriminately kill a fat cell itself
when you're born you have about the same
amount of fat cells that you have today
uh what happens is the fat cells
themselves get filled with contents
right in the form of these energy
packets like triglycerides and what
we're doing by the way your fat cells
can swell up and they can become a
hundred times their their size their
original size so it's it's crazy what
fat cells can do and so what we're what
the goal is when we're talking about
cold fat loss is getting the fat cell to
number one open to release its contents
then it needs to get shuttled to its end
station which primarily the mitochondria
to actually be burned at this metabolic
power plant and it gives off this ATP
gives off energy but what they
discovered was that about 84 of the fat
that we lose is via carbon dioxide when
we breathe out so as you describe the
sandwich so first of all the mildly
processed sandwich because even cheese
is obviously processed food
does not strike me as the ideal
barometer for whether this is accurate
so it's interesting that they're still
pretty staggering results between
mildly processed and extremely processed
and then what is your prediction if they
were to do that with like the Sean
Stevenson prescribed whole food diet
would that reduction in burn from where
you're at with a true real optimized
whole food diet be even more even better
yes exactly that's the point that's the
point but that's getting back to what
are your genes expecting you to eat
because the further we get kind of
mutated and away from the the origin of
a food the more complex it becomes for
our
for ourselves to really recognize how to
use that food which created these what I
call these hormonal clogs so this is why
there was this reduction in energy
expenditure post eating that sandwich
basically their hormones their their
tissues became much more stingy and
hanging on to that caloric energy and
fat cells not opening up
so that's number one they and this is
this is the part of the Nuance like we
can't identify the study doesn't
identify right where is the clog
happening but we know it's happening and
I would argue that it's happening
throughout the entire process right the
fat cell being able to have its
intelligence to do its job correctly
because another thing even if the fat
cell releases contents
it can get reabsorbed somewhere else so
it needs to get to its end destination
and then the process of metabolism with
the mitochondria the mitochondria have
to be healthy and doing their job you
know and so so many pieces along this
process can become
uh can become damaged you know and
here's a great thing about us as humans
we're very resilient like your body can
sort itself if you just look at us like
just look at what the body is able to
take how unhealthy we can be and still
be kicking you know but also just
imagine
how good things can get as well you know
when we give our giving our bodies the
right thing so our bodies are always
seeking to get back into homeostasis
it's always looking for that but it's
also very resilient at helping you to
survive and one of the things that I
really want to bring forward as well in
this conversation of fat because again I
didn't know we would talk about this but
in our culture we're trying to kill fat
we're trying to get rid of fat we're we
have over 200 million people in our
country are overweight obese right now
and right now we have 43 of our citizens
are clinically obese
moving towards 50 half of our population
within the next couple of years it's
insane and I think you come from a
similar circumstance in my family just
say I got 30 close family members 28 of
them were obese growing up for sure and
these are this doesn't mean that they're
bad people it doesn't mean that they're
not trying it doesn't mean that they
want to be obese it's just the nature of
the environment that we're in and not
really knowing how metabolism works and
so this idea of indiscriminately killing
fat we have to do away with that because
our body fat is actually it's pretty
amazing it's actually doing what it's
designed to do it's what's enabled us as
humans to evolve and get to this point
because it was this incredibly
incredibly intelligent energy storage
system during times when things were a
little bit leaner and the problem is we
we don't have any lean times anymore at
all so you were a clinician for 10 years
I find your approach to talking about
fat right now very revealing and I'm
interested to know why you take it so uh
you're being very kind
um
as a clinician
have you learned that you have to have a
level of kindness to get people to start
doing the right things like why lead
with that instead of just saying like
because your book ends with a
prescription you tell people go do this
and look at you cage it a thousand
different ways or you know hedge your
bet saying that I don't like to
prescribe things like everybody's
different
um why are you leading with kindness
when you talk about fat
oh man I love you this is why I love
talking with you you know it it I it is
very intentional you know I don't come
from very kind circumstances you know
like when I was in college and figuring
all this stuff out I lived in Ferguson
Missouri you know and I lived in uh
apartment complex sleeping on a mattress
on the floor I never met anybody who
went to college let alone graduated
except maybe professors or something
like that but you know just from the
environment that I was in man I was
inundated with poor health and violence
you know and even myself I was kicked
out of high school my entire junior year
of fighting I got kicked out of that
same private university that I mentioned
that you know I went to in the first
place I got kicked out of that school
for fighting who does that who goes to
college and kicks kicked out for
fighting I just grew up in an
environment where we're taught to solve
our conflicts with violence
and so I I say that to say part of it is
I believe that humans are inherently
good and but we are also products of our
of our environment of our environment
but we're creators of our environment as
well when we become aware of it and so
once I change it that started changing
the inputs I was putting into my body I
didn't just become physically healthier
my my thoughts changed you know my
perception of reality and I came across
this quote from Einstein very early on
and I mentioned it towards the end of
the book that the most fundamental
decision that we make is whether we live
in a friendly or a hostile Universe I
love that quote so much man like I get
the chills right now because I look I
lived in what seemed like a hostile
situation and I just started to see
beauty everywhere man I start to see
potential everywhere I start to see the
goodness in people because we're all
just trying to get our needs met and
seeing in my clinical practice nine
times out of ten the people making it to
me they had been they weren't treated
with kindness and so I started to lead
with that and see people open up just
when I let them talk and here's a big
tip for the coaches out there if you let
somebody talk if you just ask them
questions they will tell you the cause
and cure of what's going on with them
they already know
but we have to have the patience and the
kindness to do those things and also
knowing that
oftentimes even though they were making
the decision to put the food in their
mouth yes
I'm coming from a place where I didn't
know that there was a difference I just
didn't know as soon as I got access
I started to make better choices now you
didn't know what but there was a
difference in the foods that you were
eating like the quality of calories
exactly yeah I didn't know that there
was a difference between a fish stick
and you know wild caught salmon it's
just food it's just stuff that we eat
and we're just trying to survive
you know let alone thinking about
thriving and cognitive performance and
all this stuff we're just trying to get
by you know but once I became aware of
how much food mattered
that's part one the awareness but part
two is also the accessibility I had to
take myself outside of my environment
um and actually you know go to you know
Mao on the other side of town to a Wild
Oats you know like I had to make
exceptional decisions to make those
things happen but investing back in
myself paid off dividends but most folks
don't even know that that first part is
an option to begin with so we're leading
with kindness we're I'm assuming
lowering people's defenses we want to
avoid the morality of food I know online
you always avoid sort of BS
um you talk a lot about not getting
involved in arguments over minutia and
staying like hey let's look at the sort
of big swaths of what's actually going
to make progress Okay cool so we're
being kind we're I'm assuming we're
encouraging people to be kind to
themselves this is not a moral failing
if you find yourself unhealthy what this
is is some fundamental misunderstanding
but you just said the people if you let
them talk they'll actually tell you what
to what the fix is so if they know what
the fix is why aren't they doing it
this is a great question for me there's
two parts part one is the education and
this is huge and you're a big proponent
of this because you might know that
there's an issue with something but you
might not be educated on why that is and
also what to do about it right and so in
the instance of food I mentioned a
little bit briefly about my
indoctrination in my first nutritional
science class which again my professor
meant well but he was teaching me
something that was fundamentally flawed
because it ignores the fact that your
body is made of food all right
my my colleagues I know the top
cardiologists in the world top
gastroenterologists top neurologists the
list goes on and on they might go to
school for 12 years to become a
cardiologist and learn about food for
two weeks and your heart is made of
[__] food this is the problem like
you don't even know what the thing is
made of that you're treating and then
we're treating the dysfunction with the
drug right you've got lisinopril you've
got statins you're not understanding
your heart is made from food the blood
running through your arteries is made
from food the arteries themselves are
made from food so the system itself is
fundamentally flawed so again people
coming in they might be aware that yeah
I need to change what I'm eating I know
that but they're so far removed from
understanding how powerful it is and
what to do about it because of the
cookie cutter stuff that again my
colleague might get get two weeks of
training in which is like a low-fat diet
plenty of fiber all this really
superficial BS and then they're telling
their patients you need to lose weight
how how
like and so often and I talk about this
in the book our system of Health Care
has been treating the healthcare
professionals so poorly it's a badge of
honor to absolutely destroy yourself in
medical school and then try to pull
yourself out of it you know and just so
you see the high rates of suicide
depression anxiety obesity dying from
the very same things that they're
treating
the system is flawed and it's
fundamentally because it's not
appreciated the fact that we as I'm
seeing Tom right now and as he's seeing
me we're seeing the food that we've
eaten it's remarkable that's really well
said okay so I'm gonna start
um
putting my finger on some of the things
that I think end up causing people
problems this is obviously a world I'm
extraordinarily familiar with so put
somebody on a low enough calorie diet no
matter what those calories are comprised
of I could give somebody a Twinkie with
arsenic on it and if it is low enough in
calories over time if the Arsenic
doesn't kill them they're going to lose
weight they're going to lose fat on top
of a whole host of other problems but
like
what do you say to that Sean Stevenson
oh this is good and there's actually a
professor who did the Tweaky diet yes he
did the twinkie experiment you know just
like see I told you guys it's just the
calories
now here's some of the fundamental
issues with that because anybody who's
just as even as remotely versed in
nutrition and just fundamentals of
health because again our system of
medicine just focuses on disease not
what creates real Health but like what
is this impact that it's having on your
neurotransmitters this Twinkie diet what
is it doing to your pancreas what are
you making your heart cells out of right
what is the long-term ramifications of
of a dire protocol like that and so
here's the the term that I again
impressing upon culture is epic caloric
control we mentioned the quality of food
briefly
but another one of these major
controllers is the microbiome and I know
that of course you had folks talking
about this on the show but I want to
take this to another level because this
has to do with your body's processing of
calories and research this was published
in the journal cell really crazy study
they discovered that there's a certain
bacteria that they found in mice that
blocked their intestines from absorbing
as many calories from the food that they
ate right now through the lens of
allopathic medicine
we just need to bottle up whatever
bacteria that is and sell that [__] yeah
just black people's intestines that's it
you know black people's intestines from
absorbing as many calories you can keep
eating what you want not understanding
your body does not operate in a vacuum
there's no such thing as side effects
these are Direct effects because
everything's interconnected one of the
things I saw early on in my clinical
practice probably five years into it
I've been in the space for 19 years but
10 years in clinical practice
probably about five years into it I came
across a study because so many people
coming in statins were like
they were the hottest thing on the
streets all right because that everybody
was coming in on a Statin and there was
a study that came out revealing that
folks taking a Statin had a 30 increased
incidence of having diabetes now all
right something was happening with
creating abnormal blood sugar you know
does this have to do with the beta cells
this have to do with insulin sensitivity
you know that was open for debate but we
knew that it was happening and so when
you when you try to treat that symptom
with okay we just need to get everybody
this bacteria is this going to affect my
bacteria's ability to produce B12 is it
going to affect my bacteria's ability to
produce short chain fatty acids to
protect my gut lining and prevent
autoimmune conditions we can't think
about in those terms so here's where we
do think about it all right so they
discovered this bacteria now we
transitioned this over to humans now
this was from researchers at the Wiseman
Institute so Tom in my practice I could
have somebody send out for a stool
sample
never even see them a day in my life
I can get their report back and know
with a high degree of certainty whether
or not they're obese based on the makeup
of their microbes that is insane
and so the research question is really
fast while you're on that side note what
comes first
do you just have a bad roll of the dice
and you came out of your mother's womb
and the microbiome that you formed
happened to be obesity
um promoting or is it your diet the
microbes respond to the fact that you're
eating Cheetos and all that kind of
stuff all your cheese-like products uh
yeah which which comes first
it's a bullfand world it's a both end
World um because we are getting that
down low specifically from our mother
but one of the studies was done in
identical twins right you don't get more
similar of a person to study or people
to study to see the effects of one thing
or the other than identical freaking
twins man when they find a twin whose
bacteria Cascade is associated with
obesity insulin resistance
and and weight gain and then they find I
know one of the other twins who has in a
microbiome who's that's associated with
leanness right and they track them over
years that they're they're in the same
household eating the same diet but the
twin who has the microbiome with the
Cascade associated with obesity became
insulin resistant more often became
obese more often than their lean
microbiome twin right and the microbiome
shifts based on our choices based on our
lifestyle because one of the number one
drivers and I broke this down any
smarter as well what we discover is that
folks who are eating more of a quote
traditional diet their hunter-gatherer
closer to that type of diet they have
upwards of four times greater diversity
in their microbes than the average
person in the Western World we're losing
our diversity like crazy
and a big part of this is we're not
feeding the microbes their preferred
food source for them to stick around in
the first place
all right so these are what we call
prebiotics and anybody can go to Google
and look in Prebiotic foods but that's
limited thinking like we've got
asparagus Jerusalem artichoke onions and
garlic that's small small potatoes
here's the truth every single food has
Prebiotic capacity every single real
food for some strain of bacteria and
there might be a food that your
ancestors have been eating for centuries
that is suddenly Stripped Away by diet
choice or just by by proxy just by the
environment that you're in and suddenly
you don't have that bacteria getting fed
anymore it has no choice but to become
extinct in your system right and so what
the researchers discovered was that the
number one way as your bacteria
diversity goes down your rate of insulin
resistance goes up bacteria diversity
goes down your rate of diabetes goes up
your rate of obesity goes up your rate
of insomnia goes up as you rate of
microbes goes down all right we know
that they have an inverse relationship
the number one way to reverse and
improve the diversity of our microbes is
so simple is to just simply increase the
diversity of foods that we're eating now
why does that work I get why if I had
depleted a population and I can bring
back what is there but if it's truly
gone extinct
is there dirt on the food like how am I
repopulating if I'm not taking a
supplement of some kind with a probiotic
in it
yeah this is a great question as well so
number one uh in my practice I put
people on probiotics so frequently and
we would get like these credible
probiotic formulas some of them take
like
two years fermentation process like
Wizards do spells over them all kinds of
[__] but we were missing the point
because they they're not able to
colonize it to populate in the gut to do
all the cool things that they can
potentially do if
they're not given their preferred food
substrates they're not given their
Prebiotic sources and so to answer that
question yes we do want to have sources
of probiotics coming in
preferably through food right and we do
go through that
but also the most important thing again
is not missing the point and this is the
this is the point
when you eat a food when you would just
say we eat a berry when you're eating
that Berry you're eating a Prebiotic and
you're eating that berries microbiome as
well
you're taking that on yourself so it is
coming along with probiotic with
bacteria it's just the nature of eating
real food same thing with an avocado
you're eating that avocados microbiome
if you eat some kale you're eating that
Kale's microbiome if you eat some
walnuts you're eating that walnuts
microbiome so we have this limited
thinking that I need probiotic
you know some kind of special probiotic
food I need some special probiotic
supplement no we're really missing the
point here food already has the thing
but for many of us especially where we
are we can like Leverage because I know
some people have got some wonderful
benefits adding in some fermented foods
absolutely but we don't want to miss out
on this Prebiotic because prebiotics are
needed for the probiotics to make
post-biotics all right so this is when
they're making
vitamins minerals short chain fatty
acids in you for you it's this beautiful
symbiotic relationship so I hope that
works it does I want to draw a straight
line from the question about hey you can
eat a Twinkie and if your calories are
low enough you are going to lose fat and
the punchline of what you just said so
here's what I'm taking away from that
you actually can for sure I promise you
you can lose weight eating anything if
you keep your calories low enough now
some foods because of the signaling
effect of calories and not all calories
are the same you may have to restrict
Tighter and Tighter and Tighter on
certain foods than you would on others
and so yes you can lose weight eating a
Twinkie diet but as you mentioned not
only do we have those kind of effects
but your blood vessels and all of the
other stuff are made up of the very
things that you eat and in processing
the like at a cellular structural level
and a signaling level
you're changing
the material that you're taking in and
it's like I get why people are obsessed
with like getting shredded and being in
good shape but when you begin to
understand that that is
ah thing that happens and that there's
actually a whole host of things that
happen
then people begin to think about it the
right way now what I found amazing about
your book is you call out directly
hey boys and girls don't worry about
whether you're paleo vegan uh carnivore
what none of that matters listen to your
body
yeah now it's what I want to know is
what the hell do you mean by that
we're right now there's a lot of
infighting over minutia as you mentioned
that I said earlier
um and these wonderful diet Frameworks
these are my friends you know the top
person in each of those and they the
reason that they write these books and
that they have these positions is that
they see results for their patients they
see results for the people that they're
working with they're not trying to be
negligent they're not trying to ignore
the data they're helping people but
what's also overlooked is that there's a
large percentage of people that each of
their diet Frameworks is not helping and
that's the truth and a big part of that
is
many of these diet Frameworks even
though they can be wonderful
they can also imprison you and they can
leave things out make things off limits
that you might need that somebody else
doesn't need right but also it might be
protecting you for something you know so
there's there's balance there but we
have to have a little bit more
agency over our thoughts agency over our
choices and this gets into the
discomfort of becoming more educated
about who we are you know and
fortunately there's no easy way around
this you know if you're really going to
thrive and to be the best version of
yourself we have to learn how we work
but the thing the thing that I want
people to understand and just kind of
going back I gotta really wrap this
point up because you really like made
that hard line point about this with the
twinkie diet
those researchers at the Wiseman
Institute who understand about what's
you know the bacteria and mice they took
bacteria samples fecal samples which
fecal transplantation is like one of the
hottest things on the street as well
it's super weird but it is
um but they take they took these fecal
samples from folks who had a bacteria
Cascade associated with obesity and
implanted it into lean mice they took
another set of fecal samples from Human
subjects who had a bacteria Cascade
associated with lemeness and implanted
that into lean mice those mice stayed
lean the mice who received the implants
from the folks with the bacteria Cascade
associated with obesity those mice
became insulin resistant they gained
weight and gained body fat not because
of calories not because they changed
what they were eating because of the
bacteria
these principles supersede any of the
ideas that we carry about just managing
calories if you just get into a caloric
deficit because the mice are already
eating the same thing yet they're
gaining weight and I've seen again many
other people listening especially if
they're in healthcare people coming in
they're already
at a thousand calorie a day diet you
know and maybe they're six feet tall and
their weight loss has been stuck and
then we once we can have a certain level
of like stepping away and not thinking
we have all the answers and listen to
the person do some investigation we
might find out there's an underlying
autoimmune condition a thyroid issue we
might find out that inflammation is the
causative Factor because as you
mentioned we talk about that as well
there's so many things that control what
calories do not to say that being in a
caloric deficit can't just make weight
fly off of somebody absolutely but even
within that there are things controlling
that person's metabolism that's going to
out picture different results from
somebody who might be at the exact same
height and weight starting off as them
and I want to talk about sprinting we're
coming around the corner we hit that
final stretch and your hip breaks yeah
what happened and then what were the the
knock-on effects wow you know this was
make sure that this is this is
incredibly important at track practice
I'm coming around the the curve onto the
straightaway and I broke my hip and
there was no trauma involved nobody hit
me I didn't fall it just broke because
you know cut two a few years later I
finally get diagnosed with this
degenerative bone disease and at the
time being 16 years old you know you
have the hormones of like a a Greek god
you know so you know you get the kind of
standard of care you know take these
NSAIDs stay off the leg you'll get
better and I did but nobody stopped to
ask a question how can a young man break
his hip just from running and once I
finally got this diagnosis it was it
felt good to know what the issue was but
also it uh kind of sent my world into a
tail spin
yeah that it's pretty crazy that it
broke it's really crazy that they didn't
ask why it happened but the thing that I
find most interesting in the story is
that you decide to ask a question what
are my vertebrae made of yeah and taking
that ownership which you must have been
like your late teens at that point yeah
so this is cut two so this was 20 years
old when I finally get the diagnosis and
I'm in college at the time and you know
I went from like a chronic kind of
nuisance of a pain to Chronic
debilitating pain over the course of a
few weeks and this is important for and
I always like to share this whenever I
can my very first physician you know he
put my MRI up for me to see and he told
me that I had a spine of an 80 year old
man you know I had two ruptured discs
and my vertebrae were deteriorating and
so when he says this to me you know I'm
immediately like okay so what do we do
like let's fix it you know and he's like
you know I'm sorry son there's nothing
you can do about this
and what happened and I know you've
heard about this several times the
placebo effect is something where you
get a positive injunction from somebody
who's an authority figure and you
proceed to have certain symptoms happen
or changes in your physiology and a lot
of people don't realize this but
placebos are actually 33 effective
that's the power of the mind but what he
did for me was something called a nocebo
effect this is giving somebody a
negative injunction that something bad
is going to happen and your physique and
your physiology begins to change from
that and so I've spent the next two and
a half years in a lot of pain a lot of
drugs uh prescribed and over-the-counter
and just laying on my floor you know
because not only was this painful but it
was embarrassing you know I went from
kind of being one of the cool guys to
like I'm walking around campus with a
back brace and just you know really
um kind of losing myself I saw different
doctors I you know went through the
whole gamut of why me why did this
happen to me why won't somebody help me
and really playing this victim role and
it wasn't until I actually decided to
get well that everything changed and
most people never do that with their
bodies with their health with their
relationships it's mostly like I'll see
what will happen wishful thinking I'll
give this a try but when you really
decide something you're cutting away the
possibility of anything else but that
thing and I'm a big student of lexicon
and the word decisions from the Latin
Day meaning from in kaidir which means
the cut so when you make a real decision
about something you cut away the
possibility of anything else but that
thing and so I decided no matter what
I'm going to get well and that said and
it wasn't like you know the clouds
parted and like the sunshine and
everything was okay I'm a very
analytical person as well and so I put a
plan together I decided and now it's
time to do something you know number one
put a plan together and that plan until
three specific things I changed the way
I was eating which giving my body the
actual raw materials that it needed to
regenerate me was important and I was on
what I called the tough diet at the time
which is typically diversity food so I'm
no joke I'm eating pizza daily my
vitamin C is coming like from Sunny D
and so it's no wonder I was made out of
like I was made out of terrible stuff
you know and so I asked this really
important question which you mentioned
okay if my spine is deteriorating if my
bones are deteriorating what what is it
actually made of
and that sent me down this incredible
path of Discovery because what we hear
in common culture is you know if you
want strong healthy bones drink milk and
come to find out calcium is one of the
least important things and even getting
it from your diet it doesn't exactly
work in your body the way that we're
marketed to to because it's marketing
and so I found out that things like
silica magnesium sulfur bearing amino
acids all these things are in some cases
even more important so I start to get
all those nutrients in my body through
food primarily once I really got it like
food is gonna and was that so how did
you get that because that's where it's
it's becoming a lot more popular now but
when you would have been going through
this
you don't really think like that yeah I
mean this is about the time I was
thinking if I was eating Licorice and it
was fine because it was fat free right
and somebody said well I think if you
eat too much sugar it turns into fat and
like that didn't even make sense to me I
was like how would that be possible yeah
especially I'm from the Midwest and so
like there was like a Wild Oats Market
Whole Foods just opened and so I think
it's really important in the environment
you know and I had some friends they
would take me to the stores and then you
know that gradually got me into like not
just the supplement aisle and so I just
began to flood my body with all these
important nutrients and also hydration
your disc in between the vertebrae and
your spine and you would think like if I
want these to be more hydrated I need to
drink more water but it doesn't work
like that your discs get hydrated
through a process called remote
diffusion and so literally it's like the
last place in your body that gets
nutrients and hydration and so you
needed to really super hydrate yourself
make sure your body has an abundance
like an overflow of nutrients to make
sure that gets to the right place so
that was number one was nutrition number
two was movement and so exercise is
really about two main things number one
is assimilation and I came across some
research that showed that
um when you actually are doing walking
while taking on specific supplements for
your bones your bone density goes even
higher all right because that walking
helps your body to assimilate number two
is elimination you know elimination of
toxins because your lymphatic system
which especially when you're getting
healthier your body is trading out a lot
of stuff and there's a lot of dead cells
there's a lot of metabolic waste
products and so how do you get that
stuff out of your system you have to
move because your lymphatic system
doesn't have a pump like your
cardiovascular system does and you
actually have four times more lymph than
you do blood and so that movement was so
important in healing and here's the
problem is that oftentimes when you have
you know an injury or an issue like this
we're told not to do anything that's
often the worst thing you can do because
things will start to atrophy if you
don't use it you lose it and so I just
started to and it's of course if
anybody's dealing with like an acute
problem right now like take a day or two
off but I encourage people to do what
you can in an intelligent way and so for
me I could barely walk properly and so I
started off on a stationary bike
progressed to treadmill I started
jogging a little bit eventually I picked
up the weights again and um you know
just to jump really quickly to the end
of the story I had lost 28 pounds in the
next six weeks wow and the pain I've
been experiencing for two and a half
years was gone but the third and most
important part now I know was the rest
in recovery right it seems like I was
resting a lot by not doing anything but
it really wasn't you know it was a lot
of suffering and my greatest struggle
was at night going to bed because the
pain was so bad it would wake me up and
so I was on you know various medications
and I basically got to drug myself to
not wake up and so it was like a pseudo
sleep and it would take several hours
before I really like felt like I was
awake
and um the things that I was doing
during the day changing my lifestyle
showed up for me on the pillow because
what I really wanted to promote for
people is this understanding that if
you're not sleeping well you're not
healing well
and this is where your body releases the
vast majority of human growth hormone of
the you know these various anabolic
hormones reparative enzymes so when my
sleep got improved I got better so fast
and so I shifted all my coursework over
to biology and Kinesiology and
eventually opened a clinical practice
and you know oftentimes I would get
those people who they were told there's
nothing you can do you know
you have type 2 diabetes blood sugars
400 without metformin there's nothing
you can do about it and consistently
seeing these folks be able to naturally
regulate their blood sugar oftentimes
get off their medications insulin things
like that because where there's a will
there's 10 000 ways but it's also
understanding that first of all just
acknowledging that it is possible
and that's what I love about your story
man that like hearing you tell that the
and I've heard you quote the Einstein
quote before that the most important
decision anyone will ever make is
whether or not they live in a hostile or
a friendly universe
which a most people don't recognize that
as a choice or a decision
um and then two that from that then
people will take action because they
believe that they will get an outcome
how did you come to that decision that
you live in the universe is going to
work for you yeah when the doctor is the
one telling you multiple doctors in fact
because you said look I was you know
conscious of going and getting multiple
opinions this wasn't one guy they all
said the same thing so how in the face
of that do you make that decision one
day I am going to get better I think
it's really valuable to understand the
the benefit of Rock Bottom you know like
for me after getting those
um
the words from the other doctors that
you know there's nothing you know the
same diagnosis I had a choice to make
I'm either going to buy into this and
continue to live as a victim or I'm
going to do something about it at least
try you know but for me it's beyond try
like it's the decision right and so how
I got to that place really was
you know I had nothing to lose at that
point you know I can continue as things
are and continue in this suffering and I
think it was just a matter of like
realizing that
I think this is really important
even though there are other people in
our lives that might care for us they
don't walk in our shoes you know so when
the physician would tell me that you
know there's nothing that I could do I
knew like I it hit me like they're not
laying at home thinking about me I'm
thinking about them and why they can't
help me I have to really take
responsibility for myself and it's just
basic logic you know if somebody's
saying they can't help you believe them
you know and so I made the decision like
if I'm gonna get better I need to do it
you know I need to take action it
doesn't mean I'm not going to have great
people to support me along the way but
you know as Jim Rohn says no one can do
your push-ups for you you know so I
really had to take action and it became
you know and also I want to share this
is that if you really want something you
should make a study of it you know
especially if you don't necessarily have
a blueprint for a successful
relationship make it a study if you're
not doing well with your finances make
it a study and how what does that look
like for you I generally go right to the
medical journals you know I dig through
there and another quote from Einstein is
that you know if you can't explain it
simply you don't know it well enough and
so I really strive to make sense of
these things that can be incredibly
complex but for no reason it wasn't
until I really honored my own voice and
my gift in helping these things to
really make sense for people and so I'll
dig around in that data and um that's
the first thing I'll do and then I'll
look for some anecdotal and evidence as
well you know people telling stories
about it but here's something else I do
I also and this is the scary part I also
look at the
problems with stuff I also look at the
things that are against what I might be
believing most people don't want to do
that like we believe this particular
supplement is going to work and it's the
best thing you know since sliced bread
and then there's these other things that
say hey wait a minute this might not be
the case you have to have the courage to
look at this too and come to an a truly
well-evolved thought construct you know
we all have that opportunity but we tend
to just want to believe what we believe
and look for things to affirm that you
know you got to be careful with studies
that do the same thing and who's funding
the study as well so I really get to
that level most of the time in my
research
it's really interesting to me how and
look like you said look at the benefits
of rock bottom but it's really
interesting to me how early you came to
a lot of this and I find how people tell
their own story to be
fascinating beyond all measure and the
opening of your bio says the beginning
the first half of my childhood was spent
in an idyllic Suburban neighborhood and
the second half of my childhood was in
the Rough and Tumble inner cities around
gangs and drugs
and you said the power came from both
places and it it really helped me
understand perspective how much of that
if it all played into your ability to
sort of see through
the trappings of everyone telling you it
can't be solved in a way that I you say
it's just logic but I think most people
fall prey to that and they live there
for 60 70 years so how much of that
mindset that you got from that sort of
dual beginning do you think played into
it and that really hit an emotional cord
uh hearing you say that
you know
um that initial environment was really a
laser Foundation well before the age of
about seven we're in like a Theta
brainwave state where a lot of things
kind of get deeper into our psyche and
our subconscious our programming and so
it's really important especially for for
parents you know and people who are just
uh that can be involved in kids lives to
really understand how impressionable
they are and so I really got a great
formatting kind of formatting disc for
my grandmother who really kind of
instilled this greatness she instilled
the value of Education I love learning
like I love the process of learning and
so I really picked up early on that
you don't want to just learn stuff you
want to become good at Learning
and
when I shifted my my residency you know
going from this very protected
uh safe loving atmosphere you know I'm
in an environment where
um you know there's a lot of abuse you
know physical abuse towards myself and
my two younger siblings
um you know abuse with my mother and
stepfather in the fight you know
physical fighting you know holidays were
not like they are now like get-togethers
and family fun we know the holiday is
going to be police are going to show up
you know that that environment also
taught me something really really
valuable which is
you know even though things aren't going
well even though we're short on money
there's always a way to figure it out no
matter how bad things look we're going
to be okay so that really was a powerful
seed and combined that with the the
sense of uh greatness the sense of the
value of Education the sense of there's
always a way to figure something out
really helped that that moment of
insight to take place of that decision
that that moment of decision and this is
the first time I've articulated this but
that's really how those two things come
together Dad I'm stoked that you've
shared that that's um
it's so powerful and in taking you as a
whole and watching your show and
watching on other people's shows there's
this incredible
zen-like quality to your delivery to
your mission to what you want to do like
everything about it is is so even Keel
right because what I find with people
that make that transition is it normally
breaks them
and one of the things that I'm most
intrigued about in life is and we're
just half the chills we're just talking
about this before we started rolling
camera where you were saying with
schools right do you go to one Ultra
tailored or do you go that's going to be
the hardship where my kids have to adapt
and I don't know what's better because
the number of people that are broken by
the inner cities that the percentage has
got to be absurd right and 80 90. it's
just crazy yeah but the people that make
it the ones that find that Center
whether it's to be self-centered or not
they find that sense of self when you
said that that really hit me that
finding that sense of self not letting
the outside world dictate who they're
gonna be like now all of a sudden
adversity is not such such a big deal
because you've got like that Compass
inside of you and you know where you're
going that feels to me
um very appropriate for what you've
become known for which is sleep which
even your own publisher was like uh
write a diet book and you'll be huge and
famous and we'll all be rich and you
were like but that's not the truth that
needs to be told yeah um did that play
in like was that a moment of Sean being
knowing who he is and what he's trying
to do and he's just gonna get to that
end no matter what
you know what wow yes there definitely
was you know I I don't want to cut
Corners I wanted you know it's um
Integrity is a big word for me and I
wanted to take righteous action you know
this was this is all bigger than us you
know the impact that you're making the
Legacy that you're leaving you know is
so powerful and we're part of like a big
change that that's happening uh with our
culture overall you know where I want to
keep pushing on though is this notion of
self-awareness and how you listen to
your body so I'll give you an example
when I first started working out I had
been working out probably for about
eight months before I realized that you
could fire your lats like you could
actually send a signal to that part of
your back and it would pull your arms
down and you have this understanding of
whoa when I fire that muscle I feel it I
can actually feel that muscle
Contracting and I now have a level of
control
with food it's the same but it's like
steering a boat when you steer a boat
you do something nothing happens and
then six seconds later the boat moves so
it is very hard to drive a boat because
you have to account for that leg food is
insanely complicated if you eat one
thing and you're in a good mood you'll
be fine you eat the same thing in a bad
mood and it upsets your stomach it's so
complicated I mean that's just one of a
bazillion different ways but people
don't
learn to connect I ate this thing and I
feel this way I'll give you example for
my own life about six months ago
Sean I'm I'm always sharp and I was just
like
just in the middle of the day all the
time and I was like way out of it and
then finally I connected that feeling
with the word people use for brain fog I
had never understood what people meant
by brain fog and so all of a sudden I
was like is this brain fog and I was
like oh my God this is brain fog I don't
think I'm tired this is if it's brain
fog it is almost certainly something I'm
eating I end up tracking it down it was
pecans
I have no idea why I can eat pecans but
when I eat them every day all of a
sudden because I'd gotten into this
routine where one of my meals was made
with a lot of pecans it was amazing and
over time and that was the worst part it
probably took four months of me eating
those that meal almost every day to get
to that point but then once I was there
until I removed them from my diet I
couldn't shake it no matter how much I
slept
caffeine nothing I just felt that brain
fog stopped eating them was gone in like
48 hours that's so crazy and this is the
thing is it can be something so small
and subtle like that and what you're
bringing up and how do we kind of get
this inner guidance system back online
first of all it's an acknowledgment that
it exists because in our system we are
so focused on objective measures which
I'm very analytical so I'm super into
that stuff
but being able to track the data the
things that everybody else can measure
isn't even remotely close to how
powerful your subjective experience is
tell me something that matters more than
how you feel
I'll wait you know this is the thing
this is the most important barometer of
everything in our life and yet we get we
pay so little attention to it so basic
metrics that we can pay attention to
when we eat a meal just seeing how does
that make me feel how does a digestive
process feel but so I think so often as
well we start to have these alarms that
go off when we eat certain things and we
just keep hitting the snooze button on
it like ah you know this fatigue is
normal this stomach discomfort we get
these different responses your body's
giving you feedback that something's
wrong something's not right here and yet
we accept it as normal and so that inner
intelligence we start to create a lot of
static on the line all right so that's
part of it is being able to clear off
the static on the line and I want to add
another layer here just with a little
bit more science on what that static on
the line can look like
there's this wonderful I talk about the
science of flavor in each smarter and
there's this wonderful occurrence it's
something called post ingestive feedback
right post ingestive feedback and
essentially through our Evolution
whenever we would eat a food your body
your your brain your your tissues are
essentially like taking notes like okay
you know we'll just say just found some
wild berries you ate I got some Copper
from this I got some selenium I got some
of some amino acids I got a little bit
of uh Omega-3s from the seeds
your your body is taking notes that when
you eat that food is connecting a flavor
sensation to those nutrients and so now
when you start to become deficient in
those nutrients your body can submit a
craving a craving signal to go and eat
that food to get those nutrients back to
where we need them to be now here's the
problem
processed food manufacturers have really
muddied up the Waters of this post
ingestive feedback because now we can
make things taste like different things
all the time and it doesn't have to be
exact but it's just enough to create
enough
biological interference that we don't
even have that intelligence anymore
right so
a big takeaway from today and just
overall for everybody is that chronic
nutrient deficiency leads to Chronic
overeating
chronic nutrient deficiency leads to
Chronic hunger
when we're having these deficiencies
part of the big reason why we're having
haphazard hunger and Cravings our bodies
are driving us it's not just the fact
that we're addicted right that's that
can be dismissive they're just addicted
to Sugar well they're probably deficient
in damn near every single nutrient that
they need to actually Thrive right and
your body is going to keep compelling
you to eat more to get those things in
that's how we evolved and so
having that process you know again to
become kind of skewed and twisted up it
just it makes another layer of
complexity of trying to figure out this
inner intelligence so to to help with
this and I provided some very specifics
in the book but again I'm very much on
we've got to experiment for yourself but
one of the things I was found to help to
reduce the impact of hyperpolitable
foods on our brain
funny enough is chlorophyll all right
chlorophyll was yeah chlorophyll is
found to help to reduce the urge to eat
hyperpolatable foods and also to reduce
neural inflammation okay do you take it
as a supplement
so just in Foods you know chlorophyll
Anything Green is going to be a good
source of chlorophyll so of course green
leafy vegetables but then you've got
these super dense sources of chlorophyll
like chlorella you know they even got
its name chlorella from the high
chlorophyll content spirulina but then
you also get these other benefits there
like with spirulina is one of the foods
clinically proven to reduce neural
inflammation and why am I bringing this
up where's the interference and being
able to know how we feel and what do we
need
Tom I want everybody to get this because
you're not going to hear you're going to
hear this in a few years
but right now you're here here first
with Tom billiard
one of the biggest epidemics we're
facing today
is neural inflammation all right
inflammation of the brain and one of the
studies that I talked about in the book
this is published in the annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences
they they reported that specifically
hypothalamic inflammation and your
hypothalamus is like this is like your
body's internal thermostat
literally regulating what your metabolic
rate is your brain doesn't give a [__]
how many if you're trying to calorie
count your hypothalamus can tell your
gut to reduce the absorption of calories
that you just ate
your hypothalamus can tell your gut to
increase the absorption of calories from
food you just ate all right these things
are epical or controllers superseding
that normal function so what they
discovered was that
hypothalamic inflammation
is one of the biggest driving forces of
obesity
because it's throwing off our metabolic
rate all right and here's the other side
obesity is one of the biggest causes of
hypothalamic inflammation
and it's just creating this
terrible Loop where people can't get out
of it and again I know my friends you
might have these diet Frameworks but if
we're not explicitly helping people to
reduce the inflammation in their brain
we might just be spinning our Wheels
here but many of these wonderful diet
Frameworks though that are really worth
their salt they're accidentally doing it
anyways they're helping to reduce neural
inflammation one of the foods that was
again clinically proven to reduce
inflammation neural inflammation funny
enough and I I'm this is not an
advocation for this food it's just the
data exists I was shocked
researchers at Auburn University found
that oleocanthal rich extra virgin olive
oil
is incredibly effective at reducing
brain inflammation and it's been found
to repair the blood-brain barrier all
right your internal security system
basically keeping things out of your
brain that creating more inflammation
that gets damaged over time especially
from you know excess sugar and the list
goes on and on but wow I didn't know
olive oil can do that [__] that's really
remarkable and what they found was this
two to three tablespoons a day
and
how do you go about that there's Nuance
there too you know
um olive oil if you've ever seen it in
the stores nine times out of ten it's in
dark glass this is because it's photo
sensitive
light can damage olive oil
all right and so you don't want it to be
in clear plastic that's already nasty
it's already messed up all right number
one and also is this should bring up
well should I be cooking with it you can
and it might be healthier well
definitely healthier than these highly
processed seed oils you know canola oil
and vetcoat vegetable oil
but
very low heat but ideally in folks
traditionally we're going to use it as a
finisher so your meal is finished plate
it and you drizzle some olive oil on use
it to make dressings people put on
sourdough bread talk to me about that so
massive individual variability nobody is
ever going to be like you again nobody's
had digestion like you nobody ever will
have digestion like you so you are doing
an end of one experiment whether you
want to or not how do people figure out
what to eat
so this gets down to a principles and
not
not written rules not deaf definitive
points because again everybody is unique
so there's going to be principles in
every diet framework that are going to
make them successful and then there's
going to be things that can make any
diet framework go terribly wrong right
so what we want to do is
eat eat in a way that number one and I
just mentioned this earlier to help to
reduce inflammation so that these
internal guidance systems can be get
back online this inflammation is it's a
really it sounds kind of kooky Tom I
don't know about you but it just saw
inflammation inflammation but it is a
real problem because information number
one is not a bad guy that's number one
we need inflammation it's a functional
part of our immune system or part of our
healing a part of just cellular
processing period we don't want no
inflammation it's a part of growth
however chronic inflammation
inflammation where it's not supposed to
be like this heightened neural
inflammation can really really mess us
up so the biggest driving force is for
most of us today with inflammation
specifically gut inflammation is the
consumption of pesticides herbicides
rodenticides and you know I get I did
share one of the studies in the book
Finding conclusively a meta-analysis
that pesticides do in fact not only
create inflammation in the gut but
create abnormal uh gene expression from
your microbes right your micro most of
our if we go Gene for Gene most of the
genes We Carry in our bodies are not
ours all right we're 99 percent
genes of other you know are our bacteria
Cascade that we're carrying around with
us and so these things damage our Gene
micro the microbial expression of our
genes all right so this is not a small
thing and we've come to accept it as
normal
and right now we have
literally thousands of pesticides have
been approved by the EPA so-called
Environmental Protection Agency
supposedly protecting us many of them
have been recalled many of them are
actually caught up in red tape right now
like CLE pyrophos for example that's
been found study after study to lead to
uh neurodegenerative diseases
specifically for development of babies
and creating brain damage and creating
skyrocketing rates of miscarriages you
would think it would be it would have
been gone it's happened so many times
it's disgusting because with these
companies it isn't innocent until proven
guilty it's innocent until it cuts into
their bottom line enough the lawsuits
because it's just you know it's just
business as usual they already have a
certain amount of set aside for all the
damage it's going to cost so it when
we're talking about avoiding pesticides
this isn't a it's not a trendy thing
that I'm talking about here these
chemicals are not designed for human
consumption but the premises is
generally regarded as safe because we're
a bigger organism we're bigger than the
little pest that they're trying to kill
but things bioaccumulate in our tissues
and number one and number two we're made
of little things smaller than those damn
pests we're made of these things and
they're damaging our microbes they're
damaging ourselves so do we avoid that
by eating organic organic there's Nuance
there with Organic but it's going to be
a generally a good step to make and we
can do that ourselves and as we continue
to demand it there's going to continue
to change what's available in the market
for sure so and also a way around that
because again not having a lot of money
I would start to go to farmers markets
there was a farmer's market in Ferguson
and meet the farmers ask them hey are
you guys spreading [__] on your lettuce
you know and they're like absolutely not
you know and just talking to them
learning you know there's many in this
much less cost right I can get three
times the amount of lettuce that I was
buying at Whole Foods or whatever there
for the same amount of money so
um so yes avoiding the things that are
damaging this internal intelligence that
are damaging are our metabolism right so
that's just one
but then adding things in as well that
help to reduce inflammation so what does
that look like one of the most important
time and I'm going to say this again and
again because this has this has to do
with metabolism but also it has to do
with our Sleep Quality it also has to do
with our cognitive performance and I
know this is important for you as well
and this is the need to make sure we're
getting in plenty of DHA and EPA all
right this is so freaking important I
don't even want this to if anybody does
anything from this episode I want to
make sure that you're getting in enough
omega-3 fatty acids in the form of DHA
and EPA so
number one
DHA and EPA have expressed Lanes if you
want to think about the blood-brain
barrier being like a toll booth they
have Express passes to get into the
brain like your brain sucks them up like
in droves because they're needed for
structure of your brain cells
Omega-3s function as structural fats in
your brain creating plasticity
creating stability and signal
transduction so your brain cells can
actually talk to each other
without Omega-3s [__] goes wrong real
fast to the degree one of the craziest
studies in the book they found that the
folks who had the lowest intake of DHA
and EPA
had the highest rate of brain shrinkage
all right your your brain literally
shrinks rapidly if you're not getting
these fats in and so what it was was
just under 1.2 teaspoons a day anything
under that
increase the rate of brain shrinkage
what are the best three foods or
supplements to get your um
DHA and EPA
okay perfect
food first food first the journal
neurology found that folks who consume
Just One Seafood meal per week do in
fact perform better cognitive skills
tests I think that's a direct one-to-one
response to those Omega-3s but if you if
you're not taking uh if you're taking a
beacon or vegetarian protocol I've got
news for good news for you too but food
first and then of course there's
grass-fed beef in that same Spectrum has
Omega-3s a high ratio of Omega-3s eggs
the best food source though Tom is not
the fish the fatty fish but the fatty
fish eggs so salmon Roe and caviar can
have three times more DHA and EPA than
the fish itself and then we've got from
there most of the studies done on DHA
and EPA is done via fish oil all right
so I did share some studies in the book
that are just really shocking when it
comes official but then from there the
next rung down is krill oil right Krill
that's the microscopic shrimp super
dense and acid example which makes your
body absorb Omega-3s even better it's
incredible that might be for somebody
who's doing a vegetarian protocol
wherever that lies on your ethics krill
oil might be a savior for your brain if
anything everybody today even if you're
taking a vegan protocol please get
yourself an algae oil all right a high
quality algae oil it has the DHA and EPA
there but we don't have clinical studies
now to see its Effectiveness but we do
know that it's there and I just don't
want you to wait around for that data
DHA is so important for your brain just
to be clear this is the plant source is
ala right that's what you find in chia
seeds and flax seeds and hemp seeds I
would have patients get flaxseed oil for
years I was missing the point it's not
the same as DHA and EPA but it's so
important for your brain that your body
can convert some ala into DHA but you
can lose depending on your metabolism
your unique metabolic fingerprint you
can lose 90 in the conversion process
and so you'll have to eat five bags of
chia seeds a day to get what your brain
needs you know it's just not doable
and plus you probably want to leave the
bathroom at some point
um so that's that's that part and I also
want to share this really quickly with
uh Omega-3s and omega-6s this was a
study this was published in the journal
nutrients and it found that a large
increase in the ratio of omega-6s in the
diet compared to Omega-3s directly
increases our risk of obesity but here's
the most important part listen to this
[__]
this another study and this was
highlighted and then I broke this down
I'm getting giggy giddy right now
another study highlighted in each mortar
found that an imbalance in omega-6 is to
Omega-3s leads to dysfunction of your
hunger related hormones and increase fat
storage even with calories being the
same
even with calories being the same people
with a higher intake of omega-6s gained
more weight
and more body fat and had more
dysfunction to their hunger related
hormones all right epic caloric
controller
Omega-3s help to reduce inflammation
omega-6s are not bad but we need more
Omega-3s right now because we've become
such a omega-6 dominate Society
eighty percent of your longevity and
your health in old age is controllable
and only 20 is dictated by your genes
The genome the rest is the epigenome
that responds to how we live
so that's why I'm old gung-ho for for
changing your lifestyle because it's
gonna it could give you two more Decades
of life